# MODEL6655501972: Folate2004

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL6655501972.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL6655501972.git@20140916`

## Usage

Importing the model package.

`import MODEL6655501972 as model`

Get the SBML string from the model

`print model.sbmlString`

If [python-libsbml](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/python-libsbml) bindings are
installed, the libsbml.SBMLDocument object is also accessible

`model.sbml`


# Model Notes


This is an SBML version of the folate cycle model model from:  
**A mathematical model of the folate cycle: new insights into folate homeostasis.**   
_Nijhout HF, Reed MC, Budu P, Ulrich CM_ J. Biol. Chem.,2004, **279**
(53),55008-16  
Reference publication: [15496403](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15496403)

Abstract:  
A mathematical model is developed for the folate cycle based on standard
biochemical kinetics. We use the model to provide new insights into several
different mechanisms of folate homeostasis. The model reproduces the known
pool sizes of folate substrates and the fluxes through each of the loops of
the folate cycle and has the qualitative behavior observed in a variety of
experimental studies. Vitamin B(12) deficiency, modeled as a reduction in the
V(max) of the methionine synthase reaction, results in a secondary folate
deficiency via the accumulation of folate as 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (the
"methyl trap"). One form of homeostasis is revealed by the fact that a
100-fold up-regulation of thymidylate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase
(known to occur at the G(1)/S transition) dramatically increases pyrimidine
production without affecting the other reactions of the folate cycle. The
model also predicts that an almost total inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase
is required to significantly inhibit the thymidylate synthase reaction,
consistent with experimental and clinical studies on the effects of
methotrexate. Sensitivity to variation in enzymatic parameters tends to be
local in the cycle and inversely proportional to the number of reactions that
interconvert two folate substrates. Another form of homeostasis is a
consequence of the nonenzymatic binding of folate substrates to folate
enzymes. Without folate binding, the velocities of the reactions decrease
approximately linearly as total folate is decreased. In the presence of folate
binding and allosteric inhibition, the velocities show a remarkable constancy
as total folate is decreased.

A **curated** version of this model is available:
[BIOMD0000000213](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels-main/BIOMD0000000213) .

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2012 The BioModels.net Team.  
For more information see the [terms of
use](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/legal.html) .  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)


